pii: jc-18-00316 http://dx.doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.7230
SPECIAL ARTICLES
Use of Actigraphy for the Evaluation of Sleep Disorders and Circadian
Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine
Clinical Practice Guideline
Michael T. Smith, MA, PhD1; Christina S. McCrae, PhD2; Joseph Cheung, MD, MS3; Jennifer L. Martin, PhD4,5; Christopher G. Harrod, MS6;
Jonathan L. Heald, MA6; Kelly A. Carden, MD7
1Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; 2University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; 3Stanford Center for Sleep Sciences and Medicine, Stanford University,
Palo Alto, California; 4David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California; 5VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Geriatric
Research, Education and Clinical Center, Los Angeles, California; 6American Academy of Sleep Medicine, Darien, Illinois; 7Saint Thomas Medical Partners-Sleep Specialists,
Nashville, Tennessee
Introduction: The purpose of this guideline is to establish clinical practice recommendations for the use of actigraphy in adult and pediatric patients with
suspected or diagnosed sleep disorders or circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders.
Methods: The American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) commissioned a task force of experts in sleep medicine to develop recommendations and
assigned strengths based on a systematic review of the literature and an assessment of the evidence using the GRADE process. The task force provided
a summary of the relevant literature and the quality of evidence, the balance of benefits and harms, patient values and preferences, and resource use
considerations that support the recommendations. The AASM Board of Directors approved the final recommendations.
Recommendations: The following recommendations are intended as a guide for clinicians using actigraphy in evaluating patients with sleep disorders
and circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, and only apply to the use of FDA-approved devices. Each recommendation statement is assigned a strength
(“Strong” or “Conditional”). A “Strong” recommendation (ie, “We recommend…”) is one that clinicians should follow under most circumstances. A “Conditional”
recommendation (ie, “We suggest…”) reflects a lower degree of certainty regarding the outcome and appropriateness of the patient-care strategy for all
patients. The ultimate judgment regarding any specific care must be made by the treating clinician and the patient, taking into consideration the individual
circumstances of the patient, available treatment options, and resources.
1. We suggest that clinicians use actigraphy to estimate sleep parameters in adult patients with insomnia disorder. (Conditional)
2. We suggest that clinicians use actigraphy in the assessment of pediatric patients with insomnia disorder. (Conditional)
3. We suggest that clinicians use actigraphy in the assessment of adult patients with circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder. (Conditional)
4. We suggest that clinicians use actigraphy in the assessment of pediatric patients with circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder. (Conditional)
5. We suggest that clinicians use actigraphy integrated with home sleep apnea test devices to estimate total sleep time during recording (in the absence of
alternative objective measurements of total sleep time) in adult patients suspected of sleep-disordered breathing. (Conditional)
6. We suggest that clinicians use actigraphy to monitor total sleep time prior to testing with the Multiple Sleep Latency Test in adult and pediatric patients
with suspected central disorders of hypersomnolence. (Conditional)
7. We suggest that clinicians use actigraphy to estimate total sleep time in adult patients with suspected insufficient sleep syndrome. (Conditional)
8. We recommend that clinicians not use actigraphy in place of electromyography for the diagnosis of periodic limb movement disorder in adult and
pediatric patients. (Strong)
Keywords: actigraphy, circadian rhythm, clinical practice guideline, sleep disorder
Citation: Smith MT, McCrae CS, Cheung J, Martin JL, Harrod CG, Heald JL, Carden KA. Use of actigraphy for the evaluation of sleep disorders and
circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders: an American Academy of Sleep Medicine clinical practice guideline. J Clin Sleep Med. 2018;14(7):1231–1237.
INTRODUCTION this guideline does not address the use of actigraphy to
assess normal sleep.
This clinical practice guideline is intended to update the Actigraphy is a procedure that records and integrates the
previously published American Academy of Sleep Medicine occurrence and degree of limb movement activity over time.
(AASM) practice parameters on the use of actigraphy1 in Actigraphic devices can be worn on the wrist, ankle or waist,
patients with suspected or diagnosed sleep disorders or cir- relatively unobtrusively over a period of days to weeks. For
cadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders (CRSWDs) and reflects sleep applications, the devices are typically worn on the wrist
the current recommendations of the AASM. The prior prac- or ankle. Mathematical algorithms are then applied to these
tice parameters established the validity of actigraphy to as- data to estimate wakefulness and sleep. In addition to provid-
sess sleep in normal, healthy adult populations, and therefore, ing a graphical summary of wakefulness and sleep patterns
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 7 1231 July 15, 2018
.noissimrep
tuohtiw
sesu
rehto
oN
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
.5202
,2
yaM
no
051.102.591.301
yb
gro.msaa.mscj
morf
dedaolnwoD
.devreser
sthgir
llA
.enicideM
peelS
fo
ymedacA
naciremA
5202
thgirypoCMT Smith, CS McCrae, J Cheung, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Use of Actigraphy to Evaluate Sleep Disorders
over time, actigraphy generates estimates of certain sleep pa- The recommendations in this guideline define principles of
rameters that are also commonly estimated by using sleep logs, practice that should meet the needs of most patients in most
or measured directly by polysomnography (PSG), the gold situations. A “Strong” recommendation is one that clinicians
standard measure of sleep. should follow for almost all patients (ie, something that might
This guideline, in conjunction with the accompanying sys- qualify as a Quality Measure). A “Conditional” recommen-
tematic review,2 provides a comprehensive update of the recent dation reflects a lower degree of certainty in the appropriate-
available evidence and a synthesis of clinical practice recom- ness of the patient-care strategy for all patients. It requires
mendations for the assessment and treatment of patients with that the clinician use clinical knowledge and experience, and
suspected or diagnosed sleep disorders and CRSWDs. It is in- strongly considers the individual patient’s values and prefer-
tended to optimize patient-centric care by broadly informing ences to determine the best course of action. The ultimate
clinicians who care for adult and pediatric patients with sleep judgment regarding any specific care must be made by the
disorders and CSRWDs. treating clinician and the patient, taking into consideration the
individual circumstances of the patient, available treatment
options, and resources.
METHODS The AASM expects this guideline to have an impact on pro-
fessional behavior, patient outcomes, and—possibly—health
The AASM commissioned a task force (TF) of sleep medicine care costs. This clinical practice guideline reflects the state of
clinicians with expertise in the use of actigraphy. The TF was knowledge at the time of publication and will be reviewed and
required to disclose all potential conflicts of interest (COI), per updated as new information becomes available.
the AASM’s COI policy, prior to being appointed to the TF
and throughout the research and writing of these documents.
In accordance with the AASM’s conflicts of interest policy, CLINICAL PRACTICE RECOMMENDATIONS
TF members with a Level 1 conflict were not allowed to par-
ticipate. TF members with a Level 2 conflict were required to The following clinical practice recommendations are based
recuse themselves from any related discussion or writing re- on a systematic review and evaluation of evidence using the
sponsibilities. All relevant conflicts of interest are listed in the GRADE process. The implications of the strength of recom-
Disclosures section. mendations for guideline users are summarized in Table 1. Re-
The TF conducted a systematic review2 of the published marks are provided to guide clinicians in the implementation
scientific literature, focusing on patient-oriented, clini- of these recommendations. The recommended duration of ac-
cally relevant outcomes. The review focused exclusively on tigraphy recording is a minimum of 72 hours to 14 consecutive
clinical grade devices approved by the FDA as an actigra- days, in accordance with the Current Procedural Terminology
phy device or equivalent device that uses an accelerometer (CPT) coding requirements.6
to measure limb activity associated with movement during
sleep for physiologic applications. The review did not cover Use of Actigraphy in the Evaluation of
consumer wearable devices,3 or other non-prescription de- Insomnia in Adults
vices directly marketed to consumers, which are beyond the
scope of this clinical practice guideline. The purpose of the Recommendation 1: We suggest that clinicians use actig-
review was to compare actigraphy to both sleep logs and PSG raphy to estimate sleep parameters in adult patients with
to determine whether actigraphy provides information that insomnia disorder. (Conditional)
is distinct from patient-reported data and consistent enough Remarks: Objective monitoring is not required for the
with results of PSG to use as an objective measure. The clini- routine diagnosis of insomnia; however, it is useful in dif-
cal practice recommendations were then developed according ferential diagnosis and when objective estimates of sleep
to the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Develop- parameters are important to clinical decision making (eg, non-
ment and Evaluation (GRADE) process.4,5 The TF assessed response to cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia, pa-
the following four components to determine the direction and tient requests increased hypnotic dose, patient reporting is of
strength of a recommendation: quality of evidence, balance questionable validity).
of beneficial and harmful effects, patient values and prefer-
ences, and resource use. Details of these assessments can be The TF compared actigraphy to sleep logs and PSG for the
found in the accompanying systematic review.2 Taking these assessment and evaluation of treatment response in total
major factors into consideration, each recommendation state- sleep time (TST), sleep latency (SL), wake after sleep onset
ment was assigned a strength (“Strong” or “Conditional”). (WASO), and sleep efficiency (SE) in adult patients with sus-
Additional information is provided in the form of “Remarks” pected or diagnosed insomnia. The TF identified 46 studies
immediately following the recommendation statements, that provided data suitable for meta-analyses. For assessment,
when deemed necessary by the TF. Remarks are based on meta-analyses comparing actigraphy and sleep logs demon-
the evidence evaluated during the systematic review and are strated clinically significant large mean differences for TST,
intended to provide context for the recommendations and to SL, and SE. Meta-analyses comparing actigraphy to PSG
guide clinicians in the implementation of the recommenda- demonstrated clinically significant narrow ranges of mean
tions in daily practice. differences for TST and SL. For the evaluation of treatment
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 7 1232 July 15, 2018
.noissimrep
tuohtiw
sesu
rehto
oN
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
.5202
,2
yaM
no
051.102.591.301
yb
gro.msaa.mscj
morf
dedaolnwoD
.devreser
sthgir
llA
.enicideM
peelS
fo
ymedacA
naciremA
5202
thgirypoCMT Smith, CS McCrae, J Cheung, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Use of Actigraphy to Evaluate Sleep Disorders
Table 1—Implications of “Strong” and “Conditional” recommendations for users of AASM clinical practice guidelines.
Strong Recommendations Conditional Recommendations
User
“We Recommend…” “We Suggest…”
Almost all patients should receive the recommended Most patients should receive the suggested course of action, however, different
course of action. Adherence to this recommendation choices may be appropriate for different patients. The clinician must help each
Clinicians
could be used as a quality criterion or patient determine if the suggested course of action is clinically appropriate and
performance indicator. consistent with his or her values and preferences.
Most patients should receive the suggested course of action, though some would
Almost all patients should receive the recommended
not. Different choices may be appropriate for different patients. The patient should
Patients course of action, although a small proportion of
work with their clinician to determine if the suggested course of action is clinically
patients would not.
appropriate and consistent with his or her values and preferences.
The recommended course of action can be adapted The ultimate judgment regarding the suitability of the suggested course of action
Insurance as policy for most situations. Adherence to the must be made by the clinician and patient together, based on what is best
Providers recommended course of action could be used as a for the patient. This decision-making flexibility should be accounted for when
quality criterion or performance indicator. establishing policies.
AASM = American Academy of Sleep Medicine.
response, meta-analyses comparing actigraphy to PSG dem- Remarks: Though pertaining to the general pediatric popu-
onstrated clinically significant narrow ranges of mean differ- lation, this recommendation also includes pediatric patients
ences for SL. Together these findings indicate that actigraphy with developmental disorders, based on one study that in-
provides objective data that is both consistent with PSG and cluded patients with autism and suspected insomnia. Studies
unique from patient-reported data. reviewed included young children and adolescents ranging in
The overall quality of evidence was moderate due to impre- age from 3–19 years old.
cision. Potential benefits of actigraphy include convenience,
relatively low patient burden, longitudinal assessment capabil- The TF compared actigraphy to sleep logs for the assessment
ity, and relatively low cost. Actigraphy may provide additional and evaluation of treatment response in TST, SL, WASO and
benefits for certain patient subgroups, including those with SE in pediatric patients with suspected or diagnosed insomnia.
suspected paradoxical insomnia or those at risk for cardiomet- The TF identified a total of 6 studies, including one study of
abolic, other medical, and psychiatric comorbidities impacted non-specific sleep disorders (some with suspected insomnia)
by short sleep duration. Based on their clinical experience, the in children with autism. Because of the small number of stud-
TF concluded actigraphy may be more feasible and cost effec- ies reporting baseline data and heterogeneity of the studies,
tive than PSG in obtaining objective measurement of sleep pa- meta-analyses were not conducted for baseline data. For as-
rameters, particularly if longitudinal objective measurement sessment, 3 studies comparing actigraphy to sleep logs dem-
of sleep is needed. Additionally, patients with insomnia may onstrated clinically significant large mean differences for TST
have difficulty sleeping in a center setting and may prefer to and WASO. The study of non-specific sleep disorders (in-
remain at home for evaluation. Potential harms include mi- cluding patients with insomnia) in children with autism, also
nor skin irritation in some patients. Insomnia patients can be demonstrated a clinically significant large mean difference for
impacted by a host of environmental factors. Some complain TST. For the evaluation of treatment response, meta-analysis
of difficulty sleeping because of having the testing device in of 4 studies comparing actigraphy and sleep logs demonstrated
place. Nonetheless, the actigraphy device is easier to tolerate large clinically significant mean differences for WASO. Over-
than the multiple PSG leads. The TF also determined that if all, these findings indicate that actigraphy provides objective
actigraphy is used in the context described in the recommen- data that is consistent and also unique from patient-reported
dation and remarks, the risk of harm is minimized and the data, suggesting that actigraphy may be more sensitive in iden-
probability of clinical benefits increased. Finally, based on tifying sleep maintenance problems and reduced sleep dura-
their clinical experience, the TF determined that actigraphy tion in pediatric patients with insomnia. The overall quality of
provides outcomes that patients value with minimal undesired evidence was moderate due to imprecision and the small sam-
effects and that the vast majority of patients would elect to ple size. Potential benefits of actigraphy include reduced care-
use actigraphy. giver burden, increased feasibility of prolonged monitoring,
increased sensitivity over sleep logs in identifying short sleep
Use of Actigraphy in the Evaluation of Insomnia in duration and increased WASO. Additional benefits supporting
Pediatric Populations the use of actigraphy include: the consideration that children
and some adolescents are unable to accurately or reliably keep
Recommendation 2: We suggest that clinicians use actigra- sleep logs (especially outside of controlled research settings)
phy in the assessment of pediatric patients with insomnia and that sole reliance on caregiver data yields estimates that
disorder. (Conditional) are variable in quality. The TF determined that the benefits of
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 7 1233 July 15, 2018
.noissimrep
tuohtiw
sesu
rehto
oN
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
.5202
,2
yaM
no
051.102.591.301
yb
gro.msaa.mscj
morf
dedaolnwoD
.devreser
sthgir
llA
.enicideM
peelS
fo
ymedacA
naciremA
5202
thgirypoCMT Smith, CS McCrae, J Cheung, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Use of Actigraphy to Evaluate Sleep Disorders
using actigraphy outweigh the harms. Based on their clinical All the studies reviewed were of suspected or diagnosed de-
experience, the TF determined that the vast majority of pa- layed sleep phase syndrome. For assessment, meta-analysis of
tients/guardians would use actigraphy. The prevalence of mul- 3 studies comparing actigraphy to sleep logs demonstrated a
tiple sleep disorders in young children and adolescents, and clinically significant large mean difference for TST. One addi-
their association with many important developmental, medical tional study of non-specific sleep disorders (including patients
and psychiatric outcomes7 favors use of actigraphy. with suspected delayed sleep phase syndrome) in children with
developmental disorders, also demonstrated a large clinically
Use of Actigraphy in the Evaluation of Circadian significant mean difference for TST. One study demonstrated
Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders in Adults a large clinically significant mean difference for sleep offset
time. For the evaluation of treatment response, meta-analysis
Recommendation 3: We suggest that clinicians use actig- of 3 studies demonstrated a clinically significant large mean
raphy in the assessment of adult patients with circadian difference for TST. Additionally, the study of non-specific
rhythm sleep-wake disorder. (Conditional) sleep disorders in children with developmental disorders also
demonstrated a large clinically significant mean difference for
Since actigraphy can be used to assess patterns of sleep TST. One study of CRSWD demonstrated a clinically signifi-
and wakefulness over multiple days, it is appealing for the cant large mean difference for sleep offset. Overall, these find-
evaluation of sleep patterns in adult patients with suspected ings indicate that actigraphy can provide objective data that is
CRSWD. The TF compared actigraphy to sleep logs and PSG consistent and unique from patient-reported data.
for the assessment and evaluation of treatment response in The overall quality of evidence was low due to impreci-
sleep onset and sleep offset times in patients with suspected sion and small sample sizes. Potential benefits of actigraphy
or confirmed CRSWDs. The TF identified two studies in pa- include reduced caregiver burden, increased feasibility of pro-
tients at risk for circadian rhythm sleep-wake phase disor- longed monitoring, increased sensitivity over logs in assessing
ders. The small number of studies precluded meta-analysis. reduced sleep duration and earlier sleep offset, and improved
Results show that actigraphy is useful in the assessment of reliability compared to self-reported sleep parameters. Poten-
sleep onset and offset times and in the evaluation of treat- tial harms of actigraphy are minor, and include skin irritation.
ment outcomes in some patients with CRSWD. The overall Although overall costs are relatively low, actigraphy is higher
quality of the evidence was very low due to small sample size cost relative to paper logs. Based on their clinical expertise, the
and imprecision. The potential benefit of objective measure- TF determined that the benefits of using actigraphy outweighs
ment with actigraphy includes lower patient burden relative the harms. The TF also determined that the vast majority of
to sleep logs. PSG is not typically used in the assessment of patients would use actigraphy. The prevalence of multiple sleep
CRSWDs. Based on clinical experience, the TF determined disorders in infants, children and adolescents, and their asso-
that the potential benefits of objective measurement of sleep ciation with many important developmental, medical and psy-
onset and offset and the limited patient burden outweigh the chiatric outcomes7 favors use of actigraphy.
potential harms, which are minimal. The TF also determined
that the majority of patients would use actigraphy for the Use of Actigraphy in the Evaluation of Sleep-
evaluation and treatment of CRSWDs. Disordered Breathing with Home Sleep Apnea
Tests in Adults
Use of Actigraphy in the Evaluation of Circadian
Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders in Pediatric Populations Recommendation 5: We suggest that clinicians use actig-
raphy integrated with home sleep apnea test devices to
Recommendation 4: We suggest that clinicians use actigra- estimate total sleep time during recording (in the absence
phy in the assessment of pediatric patients with circadian of alternative objective measurements of total sleep time)
rhythm sleep-wake disorder. (Conditional) in adult patients suspected of sleep-disordered breathing.
Remarks: Though pertaining to the general pediatric popula- (Conditional)
tion, this recommendation also includes patients with develop- Remarks: This recommendation only applies to patients
mental delays, based on two studies that included participants who are appropriate candidates for a home sleep apnea test
with autism and other developmental disorders. Studies re- (HSAT).8
viewed included patients ranging in age from 2–21 years old.
It has been well established that testing with an HSAT, in
The TF compared actigraphy to sleep logs for the assessment comparison to PSG, typically underestimates the severity
and evaluation of treatment response in TST, SL, sleep onset, of sleep-disordered breathing (SDB).8 A component of this
and sleep offset in pediatric patients with suspected or diag- underestimation arises from the event-per-hour indices used
nosed CRSWD. The TF identified 4 studies of children and for the diagnosis and severity determination of obstructive
adolescents with delayed sleep phase syndrome, including one sleep apnea (OSA). Specifically, whether the denominator of
study of non-specific sleep disorders in children with autism hours reflects sleep as determined by sleep staging from elec-
(we use the term “delayed sleep phase syndrome” describ- troencephalogram (EEG), electrooculography (EOG), and
ing literature that used this nosology, which is similar to the electromyography (EMG) during PSG; estimated sleep time
newer ICSD-3 nosology, delayed sleep-wake phase disorder). as reflected by actigraphy or another method; or by simply
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 7 1234 July 15, 2018
.noissimrep
tuohtiw
sesu
rehto
oN
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
.5202
,2
yaM
no
051.102.591.301
yb
gro.msaa.mscj
morf
dedaolnwoD
.devreser
sthgir
llA
.enicideM
peelS
fo
ymedacA
naciremA
5202
thgirypoCMT Smith, CS McCrae, J Cheung, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Use of Actigraphy to Evaluate Sleep Disorders
recording time or time in bed, both of which include at least existing evidence, the use of actigraphy technology integrated
some wake time. In the current analysis, the TF evaluated the with HSAT devices is a “Conditional” recommendation.
accuracy of TST estimation by actigraphy compared to PSG
in adult patients with SDB. The TF also sought to evaluate Use of Actigraphy in the Evaluation of Central
accuracy in the assessment of SDB severity when actigra- Disorders of Hypersomnolence With the Multiple Sleep
phy was integrated with HSAT devices. The TF identified 6 Latency Test in Adult and Pediatric Populations
studies, none of which directly compared the accuracy of the
respiratory event index (REI) with and without actigraphy Recommendation 6: We suggest that clinicians use actig-
integrated into HSAT units, and simultaneously compared raphy to monitor total sleep time prior to testing with the
those REIs to apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) as determined Multiple Sleep Latency Test in adult and pediatric patients
by PSG as a gold standard. For the estimation of TST mea- with suspected central disorders of hypersomnolence.
sured by actigraphy as compared to PSG, meta-analyses of (Conditional)
5 studies demonstrated a clinically significant small mean Remarks: Actigraphy can be used for 7–14 days prior to the
difference, but the range of possible differences exceeded PSG/Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT) to assure adequate
the clinical significance threshold. In 3 studies that reported sleep time leading up to the testing.6 Actigraphy can also be
accuracy of AHI detected by HSAT (or similar set up) cal- used to establish habitual sleep-wake timing. Actigraphy does
culated with actigraphy-estimated TST, sensitivity ranged not replace PSG prior to the MSLT.
from 84% to 100% and specificity ranged from 88% to 100%
in identifying cases of moderate to severe OSA when com- Actigraphy is a diagnostic procedure that can be used in the
pared to PSG measurements. These data demonstrated slight evaluation of central disorders of hypersomnolence.9 The TF
improvement in the diagnostic accuracy of OSA with the use compared actigraphy to sleep logs and PSG for the assessment
of integrated actigraphy to estimate TST during HSAT when of TST prior to MSLT in adult and pediatric patients with sus-
compared with only using total time in bed or total recording pected central disorders of hypersomnolence. The TF identi-
time with HSAT, particularly in cases of severe OSA. fied one study that directly addressed this comparison in adults.
The overall quality of evidence was low, due to impre- When comparing TST estimated by actigraphy to sleep logs in
cision, small sample size and only indirect comparison of the 2-week period prior to the MSLT, the study demonstrated
HSAT with actigraphy versus PSG (instead of directly com- a clinically significant large mean difference. When compar-
paring HSAT with and without integrated actigraphy). The ing TST recorded by actigraphy to PSG on the night before the
TF determined that there are potential benefits to achieving MSLT, the study demonstrated a clinically significant small
a more accurate assessment of SDB by integrated actigraphy mean difference; however, the range of possible differences
in the setting of HSAT, while there is negligible harm. The exceeded the clinical significance threshold. These data, in
TF also determined that this recommendation should only conjunction with supporting evidence from other sleep disor-
apply to the use of HSAT devices with integrated actigra- ders described in this clinical practice guideline demonstrate
phy that are commercially available, as opposed to the use of that actigraphy provides objective data that are unique from
HSAT devices with separate non-integrated actigraphy, for patient-reported data. Data collected from actigraphy may be
three reasons. First, it is improper coding for actigraphy test- useful in the clinical assessment of patients with suspected
ing (95803) to be coded concurrently with an HSAT (95800, hypersomnia (see accompanying systematic review2). The
95801 and 95806). Secondly, as a separate service using a overall quality of evidence was moderate, downgraded due
stand-alone actigraphy device, the code for actigraphy (CPT to imprecision and indirectness of additional evidence from
95803) specifically requires a minimum of 72 hours of test- other recommendations. The TF determined that the potential
ing.6 Third, it is impractical to separately collect and analyze benefits of using actigraphy are large, based on the value of
actigraphy data and subsequently synchronize it with the using actigraphy to assess TST and confirm that the patient
HSAT recording to generate a combined study report. has sufficient sleep prior to an MSLT. This would result in im-
Based on clinical experience, the TF determined patients proved diagnostic accuracy and clinical utility of the resulting
will likely value the potentially more accurate assessment MSLT, and reducing the likelihood of misdiagnosis as well as
of SDB severity that could be obtained from use of actigra- unnecessary or inappropriate treatment. Additionally, actig-
phy integrated with an HSAT, which in turn can impact ac- raphy may be useful to establish habitual sleep-wake timing
cess to treatment. There is an inherent risk of false negative in the evaluation of patients with complaints of hypersomnia,
results when using an HSAT, thus use in patients with an which may reveal other sleep disorders such as insufficient
increased pretest probability of moderate-to-severe OSA has sleep syndrome and CRSWDs, and may impact the interpreta-
been recommended.8 If the patient has comorbid insomnia tion of the MSLT. While data used in the included study came
or suspected comorbid sleep disorders, the risk of underesti- from an adult population only, and no pediatric studies were
mating the severity of OSA is greater, and PSG is preferred.8 identified, the TF determined that the recommendation may
It should be noted that in the 2007 Practice Parameters,1 the also be relevant to the pediatric population, particularly in the
use of actigraphy with an HSAT was a “Standard” recom- adolescent population. The TF determined that the vast major-
mendation based on the Oxford methodology used and the ity of patients would want to receive a correct clinical diag-
evidence available at that time.1 In this guideline, which uses nosis in the evaluation for hypersomnia disorders and would
the GRADE methodology, the TF determined that based on therefore choose actigraphy as part of the evaluation. Of note,
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 7 1235 July 15, 2018
.noissimrep
tuohtiw
sesu
rehto
oN
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
.5202
,2
yaM
no
051.102.591.301
yb
gro.msaa.mscj
morf
dedaolnwoD
.devreser
sthgir
llA
.enicideM
peelS
fo
ymedacA
naciremA
5202
thgirypoCMT Smith, CS McCrae, J Cheung, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Use of Actigraphy to Evaluate Sleep Disorders
actigraphy is obtained prior to the PSG/MSLT and is therefore and pediatric patients, to evaluate whether actigraphy could
billed separately from the PSG/MSLT. be used in place of EMG during PSG to assess the periodic
limb movements of sleep index (PLMSI) and diagnose PLMD.
Use of Actigraphy in the Evaluation of Insufficient The TF identified 5 studies (4 adult, 1 pediatric), one of which
Sleep Syndrome in Adults did not provide mean and standard deviation values and one
of which used two actigraphy comparators. The small number
Recommendation 7: We suggest that clinicians use actigra- of studies and sample heterogeneity precluded meta-analysis.
phy to estimate total sleep time in adult patients with sus- Across the studies, the PLMSI as measured by actigraphy
pected insufficient sleep syndrome. (Conditional) differed significantly from EMG measures in both adult and
Remarks: The duration of recording is recommended to be pediatric populations, demonstrating that actigraphy does not
2–3 weeks or more depending on the specific needs of the pa- produce reliable estimates of periodic limb movements. The
tient and the clinical issues6,9 overall quality of evidence was moderate due to low sample
size and imprecision. The TF determined that the potential for
The TF compared actigraphy to sleep log estimates of TST for overestimating or underestimating PLMSI could lead to po-
the assessment and evaluation of treatment response for adult tentially unnecessary treatment or to missed cases of PLMD.
patients at risk for insufficient sleep syndrome. The TF iden- In addition, without evaluation of simultaneous EEG, the
tified 11 studies. For assessment, meta-analysis of 10 studies evaluation of arousals from sleep is not possible with actigra-
found a large mean difference in estimates of TST that was clin- phy alone. Thus, the TF concluded that the potential harms of
ically significant. These data indicate that actigraphy yielded misclassification outweighed the benefits of ease of monitoring
lower estimates of TST compared to sleep logs. For the assess- with actigraphy versus EMG during PSG. Based on clinical
ment of treatment response, 2 of 3 studies demonstrated large expertise, the TF determined that the vast majority of patients
mean differences that were clinically significant. These data would not use actigraphy in place of EMG, given the poor cor-
indicate that actigraphy provides objective data that is unique respondence between the PLMSI as measured with actigraphy
from patient-reported data and may be useful in the assess- versus gold-standard EMG during PSG. The recommendation
ment of insufficient sleep. The overall quality of evidence was against using actigraphy in place of EMG for the diagnosis of
moderate due to imprecision, heterogeneity, and small sample PLMD is primarily a result of the unreliable estimates of peri-
sizes in the treatment response studies. The potential benefit of odic limb movement and the potential for misdiagnosis.
actigraphy to assess insufficient sleep includes increased sen-
sitivity over sleep logs in identifying short sleep duration. This
is important due to the high prevalence of insufficient sleep DISCUSSION
and its association with medical and psychiatric morbidity and
deleterious societal effects such as motor vehicle accidents and Wrist actigraphy was originally developed as a research-
poor work performance. Additional benefits include the ob- based method for estimating sleep parameters across multiple
jective nature of the data. Potential harms of actigraphy are nights in the home sleep environment rather than measuring
negligible and rare and include skin irritation. Although over- sleep during a single night in the sleep laboratory environ-
all costs are low relative to more sophisticated, multiple sen- ment. In the last 15 years, actigraphy has been viewed as a
sor home sleep testing devices that can be worn over multiple useful clinical tool, particularly in the evaluation of patients
days, actigraphy is higher in cost relative to paper logs. The TF with suspected or confirmed sleep disorders for whom under-
determined that the benefits of using actigraphy outweigh the standing sleep/wake habits across multiple nights can inform
harms. Based on their clinical experience, the TF determined clinical decision-making. Importantly, actigraphy can be used
that the vast majority of patients would use actigraphy. in both pediatric and adult patient populations. It is important
to recognize that actigraphy is not a substitute for in-labora-
Use of Actigraphy in the Evaluation of Periodic Limb tory PSG when there is an indication for in-laboratory test-
Movement Disorder in Adult and Pediatric Populations ing, however it can provide useful objective metrics across a
variety of sleep-wake disorders to assist in the assessment and
Recommendation 8: We recommend that clinicians not use monitoring of treatment response. In general, we found that for
actigraphy in place of electromyography for the diagnosis many sleep parameters, actigraphy yields significantly distinct
of periodic limb movement disorder in adult and pediatric information from sleep logs and in some instances provides
patients. (Strong) parameters estimates that are sufficiently similar to PSG. The
parameters differ somewhat by disorder and application. With
Assessment of periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD) was the exception PLMD, this general pattern of findings supports
not addressed in previous clinical practice guidelines; how- the utility of actigraphy to provide useful information in the
ever, there is a growing interest in tests conducted out of the diagnosis and monitoring or treatment as indicated in each of
sleep center, and studies have explored whether actigraphy de- the 8 recommendations.
vices placed on the ankle or foot are a viable alternative to In February of 2008, actigraphy transitioned from a Cur-
in-laboratory EMG in conjunction with PSG (as required by rent Procedural Terminology (CPT) Category III (emerging
current diagnostic criteria9). The TF compared actigraphy to technology) to a Category I code (95803), which is a stand-
EMG for the assessment of periodic limb movements in adult alone code. These clinical practice guidelines are intended to
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 7 1236 July 15, 2018
.noissimrep
tuohtiw
sesu
rehto
oN
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
.5202
,2
yaM
no
051.102.591.301
yb
gro.msaa.mscj
morf
dedaolnwoD
.devreser
sthgir
llA
.enicideM
peelS
fo
ymedacA
naciremA
5202
thgirypoCMT Smith, CS McCrae, J Cheung, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline: Use of Actigraphy to Evaluate Sleep Disorders
inform use of actigraphy as described under this code. When 5. Morgenthaler TI, Deriy L, Heald JL, Thomas SM. The evolution of the
implementing the above recommendations, clinicians should AASM clinical practice guidelines: another step forward. J Clin Sleep Med.
2016;12(1):129–135.
be aware that, as noted by the descriptor for actigraphy, a mini-
6. American Medical Association. CPT 2018 Professional Edition. Chicago, IL:
mum of 72 hours (with a maximum of 14 days) of consecutive
American Medical Association; 2017.
recording is required, and the code cannot be used concur-
7. Owens J. Classification and epidemiology of childhood sleep disorders.
rently with HSAT or PSG codes.6 In particular, HSAT devices
Prim Care. 2008;35(3):533–546, vii.
that incorporate actigraphy should be coded only as HSAT, and
8. Kapur VK, Auckley DH, Chowdhuri S, et al. Clinical practice guideline
actigraphy should not be coded separately.6 for diagnostic testing for adult obstructive sleep apnea: an American
It should be noted that cost issues can influence patient pref- Academy of Sleep Medicine clinical practice guideline. J Clin Sleep Med.
2017;13(3):479–504.
erences regarding use of actigraphy and must be considered
9. American Academy of Sleep Medicine. International Classification of Sleep
when implementing these recommendations. At present, al-
Disorders. 3rd ed. Darien, IL: American Academy of Sleep Medicine; 2014.
though many third-party payers reimburse for actigraphy pro-
cedures, there is significant variability from region to region
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
and payer to payer as a clinical assessment tool, thereby im-
pacting its use. However, if this procedure were reimbursed by The task force thanks and acknowledges the early contributions of William C. Sherrill
payers and patient costs were reduced, this may change patient Jr., MD. Dr. Sherrill served as a member of the task force during the initial stages of
the systematic review which served as the basis for this clinical practice guideline.
preferences regarding the use of actigraphy in clinical practice.
The task force also thanks Drs. Shalini Paruthi, Katherine Sharkey, and Adam Spira
for serving as external reviewers of the document and providing valuable feedback.
REFERENCES
SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION
1. Morgenthaler T, Alessi C, Friedman L, et al. Practice parameters for the use of Submitted for publication May 23, 2018
actigraphy in the assessment of sleep and sleep disorders: an update for 2007. Submitted in final revised form May 23, 2018
Sleep. 2007;30(4):519–529. Accepted for publication June 5, 2018
2. Smith MT, McCrae CS, Cheung J, et al. Use of actigraphy for the evaluation Address correspondence to: Michael T Smith, MA, PhD, Johns Hopkins School of
of sleep disorders and circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders: an American Medicine, 733 N Broadway, Baltimore, MD 21205; Email: research@aasm.org
Academy of Sleep Medicine systematic review, meta-analysis, and GRADE
assessment. J Clin Sleep Med. 2018;14(7):1209–1230.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT 3. Khosla S, Deak MC, Gault D, et al. Consumer sleep technology: an
American Academy of Sleep Medicine position statement. J Clin Sleep Med.
The development of this paper was funded by the American Academy of Sleep
2018;14(5):877–880.
Medicine. Drs. Martin and Carden serve on the AASM Board of Directors. Mr. Harrod
4. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus and Mr. Heald are employed by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. The other
on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ. authors report no conflicts of interest.
2008;336(7650):924–926.
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 7 1237 July 15, 2018
.noissimrep
tuohtiw
sesu
rehto
oN
.ylno
esu
lanosrep
roF
.5202
,2
yaM
no
051.102.591.301
yb
gro.msaa.mscj
morf
dedaolnwoD
.devreser
sthgir
llA
.enicideM
peelS
fo
ymedacA
naciremA
5202
thgirypoC